.TH CHECKSYMS 1 "May 22, 1998" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
checksyms \- check Mach-O production binary for proper conventions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B checksyms
[\-r] [\-d] [\-t] [\-b] [-] [-arch arch_flag] [-dylib_table filename] file [...]
.sp .5
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Checksyms
preforms checks on a Mach-O production binary to see that it follows the
proper conventions.
If the binary follows the conventions,
or is not a binary,
.IR checksyms (1)
exits with zero status.
A non-zero exit status indicates the
binary does not follow the conventions for a production binary.
.PP
The conventions include:
proper stripping of symbols for the file type (and whether is is using the
dynamic linker),
if the file is a dynamic library then it checks for conventional dynamic
library install name, the preferred linked address, setting of compatibility and
current versions, 
proper prebinding and objcunique if is uses the dynamic linker,
and proper code generation if a dynamic binary so that there are no
relocation entries in read-only sections.
.PP
Some or all of the following options may be specified:
.TP
.B \-r
The binary is expected to do runtime loading of bundles and is allowed to
have static symbols.  This is to aid in the debugging of bundles using the
production binary so that back traces in the debugger shows symbol names for
static routines.  This is the default for dynamic libraries but not the default
for executables.
.TP
.B \-d
Print the detail of why the binary fails the checks.
.TP
.B \-t
Allow all symbols except debugging symbols (those created by the compiler's
.B \-g
option).
.TP
.B \-b
Check the binaries that use the dynamic linker to see that they do not have 
relocation entries in read-only sections, are prebound and had objcunique run
on them.  This is now the default.
.TP
.B \-
All of arguments following this flag are treated as filenames of binaries to
check.
.TP
.BI \-arch " arch_type"
Specifies the architecture,
.I arch_type,
in the file to check.  More than one
.BI \-arch " arch_type"
can be specified.  The default is 
.BI \-arch " all"
which checks all architectures in the file.  See
.IR arch (3)
for the currently known
.IR arch_type s.
.TP
.BI \-dylib_table " filename"
This specifies the filename of the table of dynamic libraries and their
addresses.  If not specified the default is ~rc/Data/DylibTable.  The format
of the table is lines of a dynamic library name and an address in hex separated
by spaces and or tabs.
