.TH DYLD 3 "April 13, 1997" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
dyld \- programatic interface to the dynamic link editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <mach-o/dyld.h>\fR
.PP
unsigned long \fB_dyld_present\fR(void);
.br
unsigned long \fB_dyld_image_count\fR(void);
.br
struct mach_header *\fB_dyld_get_image_header\fR(unsigned long \fIimage_index\fR);
.br
unsigned long \fB_dyld_get_image_vmaddr_slide\fR(unsigned long \fIimage_index\fR);
.br
char *\fB_dyld_get_image_name\fR(unsigned long \fIimage_index\fR);
.br
void \fB_dyld_lookup_and_bind\fR(char *\fIsymbol_name,\fR unsigned long *\fIaddress\fR, void **\fImodule\fR);
.br
void \fB_dyld_lookup_and_bind_fully\fR(char *\fIsymbol_name,\fR unsigned long *\fIaddress\fR, void **\fImodule\fR);
.br
enum bool \fB_dyld_bind_fully_image_containing_address\fR(unsigned long *\fIaddress\fR);
.br
enum bool \fB_dyld_image_containing_address\fR(unsigned long \fIaddress\fR);
.br
enum bool \fB_dyld_launched_prebound\fR(void);
.br
int \fB_dyld_func_lookup\fR(char *\fIdyld_func_name,\fR unsigned long *\fIaddress\fR);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These routines are the programatic interface to the dynamic link editor.
.PP
.I _dyld_present returns non-zero if the dynamic linker is being used in the
program and zero otherwise.  If this returns zero this rest of these functions
should not be called and most likely crash the program if called.
.PP
.I _dyld_image_count
returns the current number of images mapped in by the dynamic link editor.
.PP
.I _dyld_get_image_header
returns the mach header of the image indexed by image_index.  If image_index is
out of range NULL is returned.
.PP
.I _dyld_get_image_vmaddr_slide
returns the virtural memory address slide amount of the image indexed by
.I image_index.
If image_index is out of range zero is returned.
.PP
.I _dyld_get_image_name
returns the name of the image indexed by
.I image_index.
If image_index is out of range NULL is returned.
.PP
.I _dyld_lookup_and_bind
looks up the
.I symbol_name
and binds it into the program.  It indirectly returns the
.I address
and and a pointer to the
.I module
that defined the symbol.
.PP
.I _dyld_lookup_and_bind_fully
looks up the
.I symbol_name
and binds it and all of its references into the program.  It indirectly returns
the
.I address
and and a pointer to the
.I module
that defined the symbol.
.PP
.I _dyld_bind_fully_image_containing_address
fully binds the image containing the specified address.  It returns TRUE if the
address is contained in a loaded image and FALSE otherwise.
.PP
.I _dyld_image_containing_address
It returns TRUE if the address is contained an image dyld loaded and FALSE
otherwise.
.PP
.I _dyld_launched_prebound
returns TRUE if the program was launched using the prebound state and FALSE
otherwise.
.PP
.I _dyld_func_lookup
is passed a name,
.I dyld_func_name,
of a dynamic link editor function and returns the
.I address
of the function indirectly.  It returns non-zero if the function is found
and zero otherwise.
