.TH NMEDIT 1 "March 16, 1999" "Apple Computer, Inc."
.SH NAME
nmedit \- change global symbols to local symbols
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nmedit
\-s list_file [\-R list_file] [-p] [\-A] [\-] [[\-arch arch_type] ...] object_file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nmedit
changes the global symbols not listed in the
.I list_file
file of the
.B \-s
.I list_file
option to static symbols.  Undefined symbols and common symbols are not effected
and shouldn't be listed in
.I list_file.
.I Nmedit
differs from
.IR strip (1)
in that it also changes the symbolic debugging information (produce by the
.B \-g
option to
.IR cc (1))
for the global symbols it changes to static symbols so that the resulting
object can still be used with the debugger.
.PP
.I Nmedit
like
.IR strip (1)
is useful to limit the symbols for use with later linking.
This allows control of the interface that the executable wants to provide to the
objects that it will dynamiclly load, and it will not have to publish symbols
that are not part of it's interface.  For example an executable that wishes to
allow only a subset of it's global symbols but all of the shared libraries
globals to be used would have it's symbol table edited with:
.RS
% nmedit \-s interface_symbols \-A executable
.RE
where the file
.I interface_symbols
would contain only those symbols from the executable
that it wishes the objects loaded with rld to have access to.
Another example is an object that is maded up of a number of other objects that
will be loaded into an executable would built and then have it's symbol table
edited with:
.RS
.nf
% ld \-o relocatable.o \-r a.o b.o c.o
% nmedit \-s interface_symbols relocatable.o
.fi
.RE
which would leave only the symbols listed in the file
.I interface_symbols
(and the undefined and common symbols)
as global symbols in the object file.
.PP
The one or both for the following options is required to
.IR nmedit (1)
is:
.TP
.BI \-s " filename"
Leave the symbol table entries for the global symbols listed in
.I filename
global but turn all other global symbols (except undefined and common symbols)
into static symbols.  The symbol names listed in
.I filename
must be one per line. Leading and trailing white space are not part of the
symbol name.  Lines starting with # are ignored, as are lines with only
white space.
.TP
.BI \-R " filename"
Change the symbol table entries for the global symbols listed in
.I filename
into static symbols.  This file has the same format as the 
.B \-s
.I filename
option above.
If the 
.BI \-R " filename"
option is specified without the
.BI \-s " filename"
option, then all symbols not listed in the 
.BI \-R " filename"
option's filename are left as globals.
.PP
The options to
.IR nmedit (1)
are:
.TP
.B \-A
Leave all global absolute symbols except those with a value of zero, and save
objective-C class symbols as globals.  This is intended for use of programs
that use
.IR rld (3)
and want the loaded code to use symbols from the shared libraries.
.TP
.B \-
Treat all remaining arguments as file names and not options.
.TP
.B \-p
Change symbols to private externs instead of static.  This is allowed as the
only option to change all defined global symbols to private externs.
.TP
.BI \-arch " arch_type"
Specifies the architecture,
.I arch_type,
of the file for
.IR nmedit (1)
to process when the file is a fat file (see
.IR arch (3)
for the currently know
.IR arch_type s).
The
.I arch_type
can be
.I all
to process all architectures in the file.
The default is to process only the host architecture if that is contained in
the file if not and only one architecture is present in the file then it is
processed.  In all other cases the architecture(s) to process must be specified
with this flag.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
strip(1), ld(1), rld(3), arch(3)
.SH BUGS
The changing of the symbolic debugging information by
.I nmedit
is not known to be totally correct and could cause the debugger to crash, get
confused or produce incorrect information.
