\input texinfo
@setfilename internals.info
@titlepage
@title dpkg Internals Manual
@author Klee Dienes
Version 1.4.1.4 (dpkg 1.4.1.4)This manual describes the internal structure of the @code{dpkg} package
management system.
@end titlepage
@chapter Copyright



Copyright @copyright{}1997 Klee Dienes @samp{<klee@@mit.edu>}.


This manual is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any
later version.


This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License with
your Debian GNU/Linux system, in @file{/usr/doc/copyright/GPL}, or
with the @code{dpkg} source package as the file @file{COPYING}.  If
not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
@chapter Build Notes

@section Required Packages

To compile this package you need to have some less-then-standard
packages installed. Here's a list:



@itemize @asis
@item automake
@item autoconf
@item debiandoc-sgml
@item dpkg-perl
@item gawk
@item gettext (from the "experimental" branch - not yet in "main" !)
@item libtool
@item lout
@item psutils
@item sgml-base
@item sgml-data
@item sgml-tools
@item sgmlspm
@item sp
@item tetex-base
@item tetex-bin
@end itemize

@section Automake



This chapter by Tom Lees <tom@@lpsg.demon.co.uk> on Tue, 4 Mar 1997
21:34:57 +0000, with subsequent modifications by Klee Dienes <klee@@debian.org>


This chapter contains general notes about the conversion to
@code{automake}.  If you plan on doing anything with @code{dpkg}, you
should probably read all of this file first.  You have been warned.


The current version of automake used is version @code{automake-1.1n},
which is currently a beta version.  It has several significant
advantages over the released version, including:

@itemize @asis
@item it supports emacs lisp properly
@item It supports libtool properly
@item it includes the aclocal utility
@end itemize



The @code{aclocal} utility is a very useful program which will automatically
build an @file{aclocal.m4} file from the @file{configure.in} file to include the
appropriate macros.


@code{automake-1.1n} can be retreived from
@file{ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/tromey}


This doesn't affect anything other than rebuilding the @file{Makefile.in} files
from the sources.


Probably the main difference which is noticable is that instead of
using proprietary directory names, it now supports @code{configure
--sharedstatedir}, and @code{configure --localstatedir}. To set these
to the Debian defaults, you should use @code{./configure
--localstatedir=/etc --sharedstatedir=/var/lib}.


I have also customized the canonicalizing macros found in
@code{autoconf-2.12} to include the old way of finding the @code{dpkg}
``architecture'', i.e. to be a bit more smart. Instead of it trying to
determine the architecture only, I changed it to use the `host',
`build', and `target' system types. The target CPU type is checked
against the archtable to find the architecture on which dpkg will run.


It uses @code{gcc --print-libgcc-file-name} to find out the build
architecture if possible (used later to determine ELF or @code{a.out}
format), and also uses @code{dpkg --print-architecture} if possible to
modify the @samp{cpu} field before it passes on the target alias to
config.sub. If you want to specify the architecture, you should now
use "--target=", rather than @code{--with-arch}, which was essentially
a hack anyway.  The old @code{--with-arch} is still there, but it is
somewhat less functional. I have also moved the @code{DPKG_CACHED_}
macros into dpkg.m4 to make configure.in a bit more readable.


I also converted to libtool 0.7 (which can be found in the Debian
distribution now). Essentially, this means that all the dpkg tools can
be compiled against a shared @samp{libdpkg} without much hassle (in
fact, it is the default). You do not need to install libtool to use
this feature (it works like autoconf), and generally, it should not be
needed much at all.


The new @samp{dist} targets will build a distribution including all
files built by the @code{debiandoc2html}, @code{debiandoc2ps}, etc.,
which are included in the distribution so that people may build @code{dpkg}
without these (especially useful to porters).


A target @samp{make debian} has been added, which will build the
Debian files from a working directory (does a @samp{make dist}
first). Now all we need is a modified dpkg-source so that the
@file{dpkg-1.4.0.8.tar.gz} GNU-distribution file can be used as part
of the Debian dsitribution.  I'm working on this, but it doesn't work
too well at the moment (find it in examples).


I removed the @samp{make portable} target - it doesn't do anything useful.


I have added @samp{make uninstall} targets to aid non-Debian users who simply
want to try out certain Debian packages, and the "dist" targets are also
useful to build a "distribution" of the dpkg tool. Note that since automake
automatically includes dependencies into the Makefiles in a distribution,
if you want to modify the C files, it would be advisable to get and install
automake, and then re-run it in the base dpkg distribution directory, so that
automatic dependency generation will be switched back on, and any
dependencies which change will be taken account of. The "make maintainer-clean"
targets will remove all files which any of the following utilities create:

@itemize @asis
@item automake
@item autoconf
@item aclocal
@item autoheader
@item gettextize
@item libtoolize
@end itemize



If you want to modify any of the sources, I recommend that you do the following
first (after having installed the appropriate utilities, of course):-

@itemize @asis
@item make maintainer-clean
@item aclocal
@item autoheader
@item autoconf
@item gettextize
@item libtoolize (do not let automake run this, as it will cause it not to
include the libtool files in the dist targets) 
@item for i in COPYING INSTALL; do ln -s /usr/share/automake/$i .; done
@item automake
@end itemize



I have also incorporated the patches originally made by Galen
Hazelwood to internationalize dpkg using GNU gettext - see the file
"NOTES.intl" for more information about this.


Other minor changes are:

@itemize @asis
@item The version number is now determined from debian/changelog, not from
the directory name.
@item Creation of version.h now handled from configure script, not Makefile.
@item include/dpkg.h is now generated from include/dpkg.h.in by a sed
script, inserting the appropriate directory definitions - so now it
supports changing the dpkg directories (can install in /usr/local)
@item Updated the COPYING (1 very minor change) and INSTALL files to those
distributed with automake-1.1l
@item Since the shared libdpkg is now installed, I also made
include/Makefile install dpkg.h and dpkg-db.h into /usr/include by
default
@end itemize


Questions:

@itemize @asis
@item Should I use @samp{localstatedir} and @samp{sharedstatedir} instead of
@samp{sysconfdir} and @samp{datadir}?
@end itemize

@section Internationalization



This section by Galen Hazelwood. 


Dpkg is, to say the least, generous in its error reporting.  The vast
majority of the output strings are error messages of one kind or another.
And if you feel that you've stumbled into the Department of Redundancy
Department, you would be absolutely correct.  Many of the error messages
in dpkg.pot are duplicates, used at different points in the program.


To avoid swamping the translators completely, I made some executive decisions
on what kinds of strings to translate.  All the strings sent to debug() are
left alone, on the grounds that these are for dpkg developers, and not for
the general public.  Most interal error messages were very cryptic, and
would probably confuse the translators when seen just sitting there in
the dpkg.pot file, and are also left alone.  (I did mark some of the more
verbose ones for translation.)


If others disagree with me about the necessity of translating these strings,
it's easy enough to just go through and mark them later.


I added the startup gettext code to the main routine in dselect, which was
necessary as many of the strings in lib are translated.  Dselect is otherwise
unchanged.


Changes:

@itemize @asis
@item The files in intl and po were taken from gettext 0.10.26, by way of
the gettextize program.  I altered the makefiles to remove the VERSION
symbol, which is only used in targets which dpkg does not support.
@item aclocal.m4 was stolen from the textutils package, configure.in was
altered to use these new tests, symbols were added to acconfig.h, and
the two new directories were added to Makefile.in.
@item The dpkg, dpkg-deb, md5sum, split, and dselect Makefiles now look for
headers in ../intl, and try to link with whatever i18n libraries
configure finds.  They also now define LOCALEDIR in CFLAGS.
@item include/dpkg.h has the necessary NLS boilerplate, and the only file
which dosen't include this (md5sum/md5sum.c) had it added directly.
@item The most intrusive change is due to a disagreement between xgettext
and the dpkg coding style.  Although xgettext understands string
constant concatenation, it can't handle the case where preprocessor
symbols are used as well.  The dpkg code uses this a lot, especially
in cases like this:
@example
ohshite("error reading from " BACKEND " pipe");@end example

where BACKEND is defined as "dpkg-deb".  Because xgettext can't handle
this, I have changed this usage in all cases to something like:
@example
ohshite(_("error reading from dpkg-deb pipe");@end example

This isn't very kind to Ian, I know.  But what can I do?
@end itemize

@section Note to translators



This section by Yann Dirson <dirson@@debian.org>


Some messages in dpkg are not self-contained, and may accept several
substrings. To ease translation, these strings are tagged with "submsg:" and
"supermsg:" comments, which you will see inside PO files.


For example, as of dpkg-1.4.0.19, lib/dump.c has a writedb function
which contains the following lines:

@example
const char *which;
	
/* submsg: writedb */
which = available ? _("available") : 
                   /* submsg: writedb */
                   _("status");
	
/* supermsg: writedb 2 -- the substring can have only 2 values */
if (!file) ohshite(_("failed to open `%s' for writing %s information"),filename,which);@end example




The comments (propagated into PO files by xgettext) instruct the translator
that the first strings will be used as substrings in the last one, as second
parameter in the string (the second %s in this case).


Note that xgettext associates a comment to only one translatable string.
Thus the following would just tag one string out of 2:

@example
/* submsg: writedb */
which= available ? _("available") : _("status");@end example



As in the example, some (hopefully) useful comments may be inserted at the
end of such a tagging-comment, by preceding them with 2 dashes.



Other comments to go into PO files (provided they are just before an
i18n-ized string) should be introduced with the "L10n:" keyword; this is just
to allow stripping all other unrelated comments one day, when xgettext will
let us specify multiple --add-comments options.
@chapter Code Internals

@section Structure Definitons

@subsection versionrevision


@example
struct versionrevision @{
  unsigned long epoch;
  char *version;
  char *revision;
@};  @end example



The versionrevision structure is used to store a Debian version specification@section Functions

@subsection Error Handling


Used to managed 
@subsubsection @code{push_checkpoint}
@findex push_checkpoint()


@example
void push_checkpoint (int mask, int value)@end example


This will arrange that when error_unwind() is called, all previous
cleanups will be executed with flagset = (original_flagset & mask) |
value where @var{original_flagset} is the argument to error_unwind (as
modified by any checkpoint which was pushed later).
@subsection Variable buffer functions


These functions are used to manipulate variable buffers.
@subsection Parsing translation tables


Each of these tables is used to associate a set of strings with a
corresponding set of integers.

Current tables are:


@example
const struct namevalue booleaninfos[];@end example



Maps boolean strings (@code{"yes"},@code{"no"}) to their binary values.
@subsubsection @code{priorityinfos[]}



@example
const struct namevalue priorityinfos[];@end example



Maps priority strings to and from values of
type @code{enum pkgpriority}.  
Current priority values are:

@table @asis
@item @code{required}
required@item @code{important}
important@item @code{standard}
standard@item @code{recommended}
recommended@item @code{optional}
optional@item @code{extra}
extra@item @code{contrib}
contrib@item @code{other}
other@item @code{unknown}
unknown@item @code{base}
This is obsolete, but is accepted as an alias for @code{required}.
@end table
@subsubsection @code{statusinfos[]}



@example
const struct namevalue statusinfos[];@end example


Maps package status strings to values of type @code{enum ???}.

Package status strings are:

"not-installed" "unpacked" "half-configured" "installed"
"half-installed" "config-files" "postinst-failed" "removal-failed"@subsubsection @code{eflaginfos[]}



@example
const struct namevalue eflaginfos[];@end example
@subsubsection @code{wantinfos[]}



@example
const struct namevalue wantinfos[];@end example
@subsubsection @code{nicknames[]}



@example
const struct nickname nicknames[];@end example


Maps obsolete control fields to their current versions.
@subsection Parsing functions

@subsubsection @code{parseerr}
@findex parseerr()


@example
void parseerr
(FILE *file, const char *filename, int lno,
 FILE *warnto, int *warncount, const struct pkginfo *pigp,
 int warnonly, const char *fmt, ...);@end example


Report an error parsing a control data stream.  Checks @var{file} for
error status on @var{file}, printing an error message to stderr and
exiting with error status if an error is present on the stream.
Formats the variable arguments according to the @code{printf}-style
string in @var{fmt}, preceding the result with @var{filename},
@var{lno}, and @var{pigp} (if not NULL).  If @var{warnonly} is 0,
writes the result to stderr and exits with error status.  Otherwise,
increments @var{warncount} and returns normally.@subsubsection @code{illegal_packagename}
@findex illegal_packagename()


@example
const char *illegal_packagename
(const char *p, const char **ep) @end example


Checks the package name at @var{p} for proper syntax.  Returns NULL in
case of success, setting @var{*ep} to point after the last character
in the package name, including any trailing whitespace (as defined by
isspace()).  In case of error, returns the error message as a pointer
to a static buffer.@subsubsection @code{informativeversion}
@findex informativeversion()


@example
int informativeversion(const struct versionrevision *version)@end example



Returns true if and only if the @code{versionrevision} is non-empty;
otherwise returns false.@subsubsection @code{varbufversion}
@findex varbufversion()


@example
void varbufversion
(struct varbuf *vb,
 const struct versionrevision *version,
 enum versiondisplayepochwhen vdew);@end example


Writes a human-readable representation of @var{version} to @var{vb}.
Possible values of @var{vdew}:

@table @asis
@item vdew_never
never include epoch@item vdew_nonambig
include epoch string if non-zero@item vdew_always
always include epoch string
@end table
@subsubsection @code{versiondescribe}
@findex versiondescribe()


@example
const char *versiondescribe
(const struct versionrevision *version,
 enum versiondisplayepochwhen vdew);@end example



Return a human-readable representation of @var{version} as a pointer
to a static buffer.  If the version structure is empty, return
@code{"<none>"}.  Static buffers are allocated from a set of 10
in round-robin fashion (they will be re-used after 10 successive calls
to @code{versiondescribe}).@subsubsection @code{parseversion}
@findex parseversion()


@example
const char *parseversion
(struct versionrevision *rversion, const char *string);@end example



Parse the contents of @var{string} into @var{rversion}.  If
successful, returns NULL, otherwise returns a pointer to a static
error string.@subsubsection @code{parsemustfield}
@findex parsemustfield()


@example
void parsemustfield
(FILE *file, const char *filename, int lno,
 FILE *warnto, int *warncount,
 const struct pkginfo *pigp, int warnonly,
 char **value, const char *what);@end example
@subsubsection @code{skip_slash_dotslash}
@findex skip_slash_dotslash()


@example
const char *skip_slash_dotslash (const char *p);@end example
@subsubsection @code{convert_string}
@findex convert_string()


@example
static int convert_string
(const char *filename, int lno, const char *what, int otherwise,
 FILE *warnto, int *warncount, const struct pkginfo *pigp,
 const char *startp, const struct namevalue *nvip,
 const char **endpp) @end example
@contents
@printindex fn
@bye
